---
subject: Mathematics
grade: 10
chapter: Polynomials
---

An algebraic expression in which the variables appear only with whole number exponents is called a polynomial. The highest power of the variable in a polynomial is called the degree of the polynomial. A polynomial of degree one is called a linear polynomial and has the general form a x plus b, where a is not zero. A polynomial of degree two is called a quadratic polynomial and has the general form a x squared plus b x plus c, where a is not zero. The word quadratic comes from quadrate, which means square. A polynomial of degree three is called a cubic polynomial and has the general form a x cubed plus b x squared plus c x plus d, where a is not zero.

If p of x is a polynomial in x and k is any real number, then the value obtained by replacing x with k is called the value of the polynomial at k, written p of k. A real number k is called a zero of the polynomial p of x if p of k equals zero. For a linear polynomial a x plus b, the only zero is negative b by a, that is, the negative of the constant term divided by the coefficient of x. A linear polynomial therefore has exactly one zero.

There is a direct geometrical meaning of a zero. The graph of a linear polynomial is a straight line, and it crosses the x axis at exactly one point, whose x coordinate is the zero of the polynomial. The graph of a quadratic polynomial is a curve called a parabola. The parabola opens upwards when the coefficient a is positive and opens downwards when a is negative. The zeroes of a quadratic polynomial are precisely the x coordinates of the points where the parabola intersects the x axis. A parabola may cut the x axis at two distinct points, may just touch it at one point, or may not meet it at all, which is why a quadratic polynomial has at most two zeroes. In general, a polynomial of degree n has at most n zeroes.

There are useful relationships between the zeroes and the coefficients of a polynomial. For a quadratic polynomial a x squared plus b x plus c with zeroes alpha and beta, the sum of the zeroes alpha plus beta equals negative b by a, which is the negative of the coefficient of x divided by the coefficient of x squared. The product of the zeroes alpha times beta equals c by a, which is the constant term divided by the coefficient of x squared. These two relations allow a quadratic polynomial to be reconstructed from its zeroes: a quadratic polynomial with given sum of zeroes S and product of zeroes P can be written as k times the expression x squared minus S x plus P, where k is any non-zero real number.

Similar relations hold for a cubic polynomial a x cubed plus b x squared plus c x plus d with zeroes alpha, beta and gamma. The sum of the zeroes equals negative b by a. The sum of the products of the zeroes taken two at a time equals c by a. The product of all three zeroes equals negative d by a.

Polynomials can be divided by one another using the division algorithm, which extends long division of numbers. If p of x and g of x are any two polynomials with g of x not equal to the zero polynomial, then there exist polynomials q of x and r of x such that p of x equals g of x times q of x plus r of x, where r of x is either the zero polynomial or has degree less than the degree of g of x. Here p of x is the dividend, g of x the divisor, q of x the quotient and r of x the remainder. In the division process, the dividend and divisor are first arranged in decreasing order of their degrees, and at each step the first term of the current dividend is divided by the first term of the divisor to obtain the next term of the quotient. If the remainder is the zero polynomial, then the divisor is a factor of the dividend. The division algorithm is often used to find the remaining zeroes of a cubic polynomial when two of its zeroes are already known, by dividing the polynomial by the quadratic factor formed from those known zeroes.
