---
subject: Science
grade: 8
chapter: Crop Production and Management
---

All living organisms need food, and the food we eat is obtained either from plants or from animals. When plants of the same kind are grown and cultivated at one place on a large scale, it is called a crop. Crops are broadly classified into two seasonal groups in India. Kharif crops are sown in the rainy season, roughly from June to September, and include paddy, maize, soyabean, groundnut and cotton. Rabi crops are grown in the winter season, roughly from October to March, and include wheat, gram, pea, mustard and linseed.

Growing a crop successfully involves a sequence of activities called agricultural practices. These practices, taken in order, are preparation of soil, sowing, adding manure and fertilisers, irrigation, protecting from weeds, harvesting and storage.

Preparation of soil is the first step. The soil is turned and loosened by ploughing, which brings nutrient-rich soil to the top so that plants can use those nutrients. Loosening the soil also allows the roots to breathe easily even when they go deep into the ground, and it helps earthworms and microbes that further enrich the soil. The ploughed field may have large pieces of soil called crumbs, which are broken by levelling with a leveller. Levelling the field is useful for sowing as well as for irrigation, because it prevents water from being carried away unevenly.

Sowing is the process of putting seeds into the soil. Before sowing, good quality seeds are selected; damaged and hollow seeds are removed because they tend to float on water and can be separated that way. Traditionally seeds were scattered by hand or sown with a funnel-shaped tool. Today a seed drill fitted to a tractor is used, which sows seeds uniformly at the proper depth and covers them with soil, protecting them from being eaten by birds. Correct spacing between seeds matters, because overcrowded plants compete for sunlight, nutrients and water.

Soil supplies mineral nutrients to the crop, but continuous growing of crops makes the soil poorer in those nutrients. Nutrients are replenished by adding manure and fertilisers. Manure is an organic substance obtained from the decomposition of plant or animal wastes; it enhances water holding capacity, makes the soil porous, increases the number of friendly microbes and improves soil texture. A fertiliser is a chemical substance produced in factories, such as urea, ammonium sulphate, superphosphate and potash. Fertilisers give higher yield but their excessive use damages soil fertility and pollutes water bodies. Fields can also be replenished by crop rotation and by growing leguminous crops, whose root nodules host Rhizobium bacteria that fix atmospheric nitrogen.

The supply of water to crops at appropriate intervals is called irrigation. Water is important because it helps in germination of seeds, because nutrients dissolved in water are transported to each part of the plant, and because it protects crops from frost and hot air currents. Traditional methods of irrigation include the moat or pulley system, chain pump, dhekli and rahat. Modern methods use pumps and deliver water more economically: in sprinkler irrigation water is sprayed over the crop as if it were raining, which suits uneven land and sandy soil, and in drip irrigation water falls drop by drop directly near the roots, which is the best technique for regions where water is scarce.

Unwanted plants that grow naturally along with the crop are called weeds, and their removal is called weeding. Weeds compete with the crop for water, nutrients, space and light, and some can be poisonous. Weeds are removed manually with a khurpi or a seed drill, or by spraying chemicals called weedicides, such as 2,4-D, which are diluted with water and sprayed in the field.

The cutting of a mature crop is called harvesting; it is done manually with a sickle or with a machine called a harvester. After harvesting, the grain seeds are separated from the chaff by a process called threshing, which is carried out with a machine called a combine that is both a harvester and a thresher. Farmers with small holdings separate grain from chaff by winnowing. Harvested grains must be stored properly, because fresh crops have more moisture and can be spoiled by microorganisms and insect pests. Grains are dried in the sun before storage, kept in jute bags or metallic bins at home, and stored on a large scale in silos and granaries protected from pests by fumigation.
