---
subject: Science
grade: 8
chapter: Microorganisms - Friend and Foe
---

Living organisms that are too small to be seen with the unaided eye are called microorganisms or microbes. They are observed with the help of a microscope. Microorganisms are classified into four major groups: bacteria, fungi, protozoa and some algae. Viruses are also microscopic but differ from the rest, because they reproduce only inside the cells of a host organism, which may be a bacterium, a plant or an animal.

Microorganisms live in all kinds of environments, from ice cold climates to hot springs, and from deserts to marshy land. They are also found inside the bodies of animals including humans. Some microorganisms are unicellular, such as bacteria, some algae and protozoa, while others such as many fungi and algae are multicellular. Common examples include the bacterium Lactobacillus, the fungus bread mould, the protozoan Amoeba and the alga Chlamydomonas. Diseases such as the common cold, influenza, polio and chickenpox are caused by viruses, while dysentery and malaria are caused by protozoa.

Microorganisms are useful in many ways. In the making of curd, the bacterium Lactobacillus promotes the formation of curd from milk by multiplying and converting milk sugar into lactic acid. Bacteria are also involved in making cheese, pickles and many other food items. Yeast is used in the baking industry to make bread, pastries and cakes. Yeast reproduces rapidly and produces carbon dioxide during respiration; the bubbles of this gas fill the dough and increase its volume, which is why bread rises and becomes soft and spongy.

The process of conversion of sugar into alcohol in the absence of air is called fermentation, and it was discovered by Louis Pasteur in 1857. Yeast is used for the large scale production of alcohol, wine and acetic acid. Yeast is grown on natural sugars present in grains such as barley, wheat and rice, and in fruit juices and crushed grapes.

Medicines produced by microorganisms save many lives. An antibiotic is a medicine that stops or slows the growth of disease-causing microorganisms. Antibiotics are manufactured by growing specific bacteria and fungi. Penicillin, the first antibiotic, was discovered by Alexander Fleming in 1929 when he observed that mould growing on a culture plate had stopped the growth of bacteria around it. Streptomycin, tetracycline and erythromycin are other common antibiotics. Antibiotics should be taken only on the advice of a qualified doctor and the full course must be completed, because taking them unnecessarily or in the wrong dose may make the drug less effective when it is really needed. Antibiotics are not effective against viral diseases such as the common cold.

A vaccine is a preparation containing dead or weakened microbes. When it is introduced into a healthy body, the body fights and kills the invading microbes by producing antibodies, and the body remembers how to make those antibodies afterwards. This is why a vaccinated person is protected from that disease in future. Edward Jenner discovered the vaccine for smallpox in 1798. Vaccines are available today for cholera, tuberculosis, hepatitis and many other diseases, and a worldwide vaccination programme has eradicated smallpox.

Microorganisms also increase soil fertility and clean the environment. Certain bacteria and blue green algae are able to fix nitrogen from the atmosphere and enrich the soil with nitrogen compounds. Rhizobium bacteria live in the root nodules of leguminous plants such as gram, pea, moong and beans, and fix atmospheric nitrogen in a form the plant can use. Other microorganisms decompose organic waste, dead plants and animals into simple substances that are used again by plants, which is the basis of the nitrogen cycle.

Some microorganisms are harmful. Disease-causing microorganisms are called pathogens. Microbial diseases that spread from an infected person to a healthy person through air, water, food or physical contact are called communicable diseases; tuberculosis, measles, chickenpox and cholera are examples. Some diseases are carried by insects and animals called carriers. The female Anopheles mosquito carries the malarial parasite, and the female Aedes mosquito acts as a carrier of the dengue virus. Microorganisms also cause diseases in animals, such as anthrax in cattle and humans, and in plants, such as citrus canker and rust of wheat.

Microorganisms that spoil food produce toxic substances, which makes the food poisonous and can cause serious illness or death. Food is preserved by several methods. Salt and edible oils are used to check the growth of bacteria in pickles and dried meat. Sugar reduces moisture content in jams and jellies and so inhibits the growth of bacteria. Heating milk to about 70 degrees Celsius for 15 to 30 seconds and then suddenly chilling it is called pasteurisation, a process discovered by Louis Pasteur, and it kills the microbes without spoiling the milk.
