---
subject: Science
grade: 10
chapter: Chemical Reactions and Equations
---

A chemical reaction is a change in which one or more new substances with new properties are formed. The substances that take part in a chemical reaction are called reactants and the new substances formed are called products. Several observations tell us that a chemical reaction has taken place: a change in state, a change in colour, the evolution of a gas, a change in temperature, and the formation of a precipitate.

A chemical equation is the symbolic representation of a chemical reaction, with the reactants written on the left-hand side and the products on the right-hand side, separated by an arrow pointing towards the products. According to the law of conservation of mass, mass can neither be created nor destroyed in a chemical reaction, so the total mass of the reactants equals the total mass of the products. It follows that the number of atoms of each element must be equal on both sides of the equation. An equation in which this is true is called a balanced chemical equation, and every chemical equation must be balanced. Balancing is done by the hit-and-trial method, in which coefficients are placed before formulae, but the formulae of the substances themselves are never changed. The physical states of the reactants and products are indicated by the symbols g for gas, l for liquid, s for solid and aq for aqueous solution, and conditions such as temperature, pressure or a catalyst are written above or below the arrow.

Chemical reactions are classified into several types. In a combination reaction two or more substances combine to form a single product; the burning of coal and the reaction of quicklime with water to form slaked lime are examples. In a decomposition reaction a single substance breaks down into two or more simpler substances. Decomposition brought about by heat is called thermal decomposition, such as the heating of calcium carbonate to give calcium oxide and carbon dioxide, which is used in the manufacture of cement. Decomposition brought about by electricity is called electrolytic decomposition, such as the electrolysis of water into hydrogen and oxygen. Decomposition brought about by light is called photolytic decomposition, such as the decomposition of silver chloride into silver and chlorine in sunlight, a reaction used in black and white photography.

Reactions in which heat is released along with the formation of products are called exothermic reactions. The burning of natural gas, respiration in living beings, and the decomposition of vegetable matter into compost are exothermic. Reactions in which energy is absorbed are called endothermic reactions; the thermal decomposition of calcium carbonate is one example.

In a displacement reaction a more reactive element displaces a less reactive element from its compound. When an iron nail is placed in a copper sulphate solution, the solution changes from blue to green because iron displaces copper, forming iron sulphate and copper. In a double displacement reaction there is an exchange of ions between the two reactants. When sodium sulphate solution is mixed with barium chloride solution, a white insoluble substance called barium sulphate is formed. An insoluble solid that separates out during a reaction in solution is called a precipitate, and any reaction that produces one is a precipitation reaction.

Oxidation is the gain of oxygen or the loss of hydrogen by a substance, and reduction is the loss of oxygen or the gain of hydrogen. In a reaction where one substance is oxidised and another is simultaneously reduced, the reaction is called an oxidation-reduction reaction or a redox reaction. When copper oxide is heated with hydrogen, copper oxide is reduced to copper while hydrogen is oxidised to water. The substance that gives oxygen to another substance is called the oxidising agent, and the substance that removes oxygen is called the reducing agent.

Two everyday effects of oxidation are corrosion and rancidity. Corrosion is the process in which a metal is attacked by substances around it such as moisture and acids. Iron develops a brown flaky substance called rust, copper develops a green coat of basic copper carbonate, and silver develops a black coating of silver sulphide. Corrosion of iron is a serious problem because it weakens bridges, ships, cars and iron railings. Rancidity is the term used when fats and oils are oxidised and their smell and taste change. Rancidity is slowed by adding antioxidants, by packing food in air-tight containers, and by flushing packets of chips with nitrogen gas, which prevents oxidation because nitrogen is unreactive.
