---
subject: Science
grade: 10
chapter: Acids, Bases and Salts
---

Acids are substances that taste sour and turn blue litmus red, while bases taste bitter, feel soapy to touch and turn red litmus blue. Substances whose smell or colour changes depending on whether they are placed in an acidic or a basic medium are called indicators. Litmus, methyl orange and phenolphthalein are synthetic indicators; litmus solution is a natural indicator extracted from lichens. Substances such as onion and vanilla essence, whose odour changes in acidic or basic media, are called olfactory indicators.

Acids react with metals to produce hydrogen gas and a corresponding salt. The hydrogen gas evolved can be tested by bringing a burning candle near it, which produces a pop sound. Metal carbonates and metal hydrogencarbonates react with acids to give a salt, carbon dioxide and water. Carbon dioxide turns lime water milky, because it reacts with calcium hydroxide to form a white precipitate of calcium carbonate; on passing excess carbon dioxide the precipitate dissolves again to form soluble calcium hydrogencarbonate and the milkiness disappears.

The reaction between an acid and a base to give a salt and water is called a neutralisation reaction. In general, acid plus base gives salt plus water. Metal oxides react with acids to give salt and water in the same way as bases do, and so metal oxides are said to be basic oxides. Similarly non-metallic oxides such as carbon dioxide are acidic oxides, because they react with bases to give salt and water.

Acids produce hydrogen ions in aqueous solution, and it is these ions that are responsible for their acidic character. Hydrogen ions cannot exist alone; they exist as hydronium ions after combining with water molecules. This is why an acid shows acidic behaviour only in the presence of water. Bases generate hydroxide ions in water. Bases that are soluble in water are called alkalis. The process of dissolving an acid or a base in water is highly exothermic, so a concentrated acid must always be added slowly to water with constant stirring, and never the reverse, because adding water to concentrated acid can cause the mixture to splash out and the container to break due to excessive local heating.

The strength of an acid or a base is judged by the concentration of hydrogen or hydroxide ions produced, and this is measured on a scale called the pH scale. The p in pH stands for potenz, the German word for power. The scale usually runs from 0 to 14. A neutral solution has a pH of exactly 7, an acidic solution has a pH less than 7, and a basic solution has a pH greater than 7. As the hydrogen ion concentration increases the pH decreases. A universal indicator shows different colours at different hydrogen ion concentrations and is used to estimate pH.

The pH of a solution matters in everyday life. Living organisms survive only in a narrow range of pH, and our body works within the range of 7.0 to 7.8. Acid rain occurs when the pH of rain water falls below 5.6, and when such water flows into rivers it lowers the pH of the river water and makes the survival of aquatic life difficult. Plants require a specific pH range in the soil for healthy growth. In the stomach, dilute hydrochloric acid helps in the digestion of food, but an excess causes indigestion and pain; antacids such as magnesium hydroxide, which is a mild base, neutralise the excess acid. Tooth decay starts when the pH in the mouth falls below 5.5, because the enamel, made of calcium phosphate, begins to corrode; cleaning the teeth with a basic toothpaste neutralises the excess acid. Bee sting causes pain because of an acid injected into the skin, and rubbing a mild base such as baking soda gives relief.

Salts are formed from the neutralisation of an acid and a base, and salts of a strong acid and a strong base are neutral with a pH of 7. Common salt, sodium chloride, is the raw material for many chemicals. The electrolysis of a concentrated solution of sodium chloride, called brine, is the chlor-alkali process and gives sodium hydroxide at the cathode side, chlorine gas at the anode and hydrogen gas. Bleaching powder is produced by the action of chlorine on dry slaked lime and is used for bleaching cotton and linen, and for disinfecting drinking water. Baking soda, sodium hydrogencarbonate, is a mild non-corrosive base used in baking powder and as an antacid. Washing soda, sodium carbonate decahydrate, is used in glass, soap and paper industries and for removing the permanent hardness of water. Plaster of Paris is obtained by heating gypsum at 373 kelvin and sets into a hard solid when mixed with water, which is why it is used for supporting fractured bones.
