---
subject: Science
grade: 10
chapter: Light - Reflection and Refraction
---

Light appears to travel in straight lines, and it is because of this that we see objects. When light falls on a highly polished surface such as a mirror, most of it bounces back; this bouncing back is called reflection of light. Reflection follows two laws. First, the angle of incidence is equal to the angle of reflection. Second, the incident ray, the normal to the mirror at the point of incidence, and the reflected ray all lie in the same plane. These laws hold for all reflecting surfaces, whether plane or spherical.

A plane mirror forms an image that is virtual, erect, of the same size as the object, and laterally inverted. The image is formed as far behind the mirror as the object is in front of it. A spherical mirror is one whose reflecting surface is a part of a sphere. If the reflecting surface is curved inwards, the mirror is concave; if it bulges outwards, the mirror is convex. The centre of the reflecting surface is called the pole, the centre of the sphere of which the mirror is a part is the centre of curvature, and the radius of that sphere is the radius of curvature. The straight line passing through the pole and the centre of curvature is the principal axis. The principal focus lies midway between the pole and the centre of curvature, so the focal length is half the radius of curvature.

Rays parallel to the principal axis, after reflection from a concave mirror, converge at the principal focus. The same rays, after reflection from a convex mirror, appear to diverge from a principal focus situated behind the mirror. A concave mirror produces images of different nature and size depending on the position of the object: when the object is at infinity the image is highly diminished and formed at the focus, when the object is beyond the centre of curvature the image is real, inverted and diminished, when the object is at the centre of curvature the image is real, inverted and of the same size, when the object is between the centre of curvature and the focus the image is real, inverted and enlarged, and when the object is between the pole and the focus the image is virtual, erect and enlarged. A convex mirror always forms a virtual, erect and diminished image, whatever the position of the object.

Because a convex mirror gives an erect image and has a wide field of view, it is used as a rear-view mirror in vehicles. Concave mirrors are used in torches, searchlights and vehicle headlights to get powerful parallel beams, by dentists to see large images of teeth, and as shaving mirrors to see a magnified face.

For spherical mirrors, distances are measured from the pole using the New Cartesian Sign Convention: the object is always placed on the left, distances measured in the direction of the incident light are positive and those measured against it are negative, heights measured upwards and perpendicular to the principal axis are positive and those measured downwards are negative. The mirror formula relates the object distance, the image distance and the focal length as one upon image distance plus one upon object distance equals one upon focal length. Magnification is the ratio of the height of the image to the height of the object, and it is also equal to the negative of the ratio of the image distance to the object distance.

When light travels obliquely from one transparent medium into another, the direction of propagation changes. This bending of light at the boundary is called refraction. Refraction occurs because the speed of light is different in different media. The laws of refraction state that the incident ray, the refracted ray and the normal at the point of incidence all lie in the same plane, and that the ratio of the sine of the angle of incidence to the sine of the angle of refraction is a constant for a given pair of media, which is Snell's law. A ray of light bends towards the normal when it enters an optically denser medium such as glass from air, and away from the normal when it enters a rarer medium. A ray falling normally on the surface passes without bending. The refractive index of a medium is the ratio of the speed of light in vacuum to the speed of light in that medium, and a medium with a larger refractive index is optically denser.

A lens is a transparent material bound by two surfaces of which at least one is spherical. A lens thicker in the middle than at the edges is a convex or converging lens, and one thinner in the middle is a concave or diverging lens. A convex lens converges a parallel beam to a real principal focus, while a concave lens makes it appear to diverge from a virtual focus. A convex lens forms real and inverted images for objects placed beyond the focus, and a virtual, erect and enlarged image when the object lies between the focus and the optical centre, which is why it is used as a magnifying glass. A concave lens always forms a virtual, erect and diminished image. The lens formula states that one upon image distance minus one upon object distance equals one upon focal length. The power of a lens is the reciprocal of its focal length expressed in metres, and its unit is the dioptre; the power of a convex lens is positive and that of a concave lens is negative.
